Blog post: Making a strategic bet on rust (#1894)
mainmatter/mainmatter.com: src/posts/2022-10-12-making-a-bet-on-rust.md

  <p>We feel now is the right time for more teams to adopt Rust also in web projects.
  The ecosystem has reached sufficient maturity for that to be feasible and <strong>we're making
  a strategic decision to establish Mainmatter as the leading consultancy for Rust
  in web contexts</strong>. We will leverage our years-long experience augmenting and
  mentoring web teams to help them adopt Rust. Here's why we think this is the
  right step at the right time.</p>

# image: "/assets/images/posts/2022-10-12-making-a-bet-on-rust/mainmatter-loves-rust.svg"
# imageAlt: "Mainmatter loves Rust"
---

Rust makes a level of efficiency and performance that's on par with C and C++

> accessible to a wider audience of engineering teams. While C and C++ have

Reviewer: FWIW I first read "Rust makes a level of efficiency and performance that's on par with C and C++" and was wondering how the word "makes" fits into this sentence before I discovered the rest of the sentence. Not sure if additional commas would help, or if the sentences just needs to be simplified in general 😅

Author: yeah probably should be simplified…

Author: fixed

allowed building highly efficient systems for decades, they come with so many
footguns that only extremely skilled and experienced teams can dare to build
anything substantial with them – and
[even those end up with systems that have plenty of problems](https://www.memorysafety.org/about/).
Now, with Rust, everyone can build systems with the same level of efficiency and

> performance without having to worry about any of said footguns. Building on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
performance without having to worry about most of said footguns. Building on
```

it's still not a perfect language 😉

Rust, their systems will not only be just as fast as an equivalent system
written in C but also more stable and robust. In addition to ensuring memory
safety, Rust's rich type system and concepts like the `Option` and `Result`
types further increase confidence by encouraging solid error handling through
concepts of the language itself.

Yet, Rust enables all that without sacrificing expressiveness of the language,
productivity, and developer experience – it's essentially on par in that regard
with other modern languages. Modern concepts like pattern matching and generics,
the integrated [package manager](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/) and its solid
development tools, make working with it a breeze.

## Rust on the Web

So where do we see Rust fitting in for web projects? After ca. 10 years since
the language's creation, the ecosystem is still relatively young, yet mature
enough for a variety of use cases already:

- NIFs (Natively Implemented Functions) can be used to speed up parts of
  existing systems written in Ruby, Elixir, Node, and many other languages, by
  orders of magnitude and provide an easy onramp to introducing Rust into a

>   team's tech stack.

Reviewer: non-blocking: tbh I've only ever heard of them being described as "NIFs" in the Elixir ecosystem. when I think of these sorts of things FFI (Foreign Function Interface) is the first keyword that I think about.

Author: ah, good point – will update

  layers in multi-layered systems.
- Similar to subsystems, downstream systems for e.g. data processing and similar
  tasks with relatively limited scope but hard requirements regarding efficiency
  will often benefit hugely from an implementation in Rust.

While all these are relatively isolated use cases with limited scope, we believe
that eventually Rust will be a reasonable choice for building complete API
servers as well. That problem space still requires some exploration to develop
and establish best practices and architectures and we're excited to bring in our
years-long experience building web apps of all kinds to help do this for the
benefit of our clients and the ecosystem overall. Establishing these patterns
and building consensus across the community will eventually drive adoption of
Rust on the web even further as it makes Rust more accessible for more teams.

Of course there's also WASM – while that sees adoption outside of the browser
(e.g. via the
[WebAssembly Micro Runtime](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasm-micro-runtime)),
it was originally built to enable an entirely new category of apps to run in
browsers. Except for some high visibility examples

> ([Figma](https://www.figma.com/) likely being the most well known one), it

Reviewer: non-blocking, but for awareness: I recently discovered http://onshape.com/, which is a full CAD system built with WASM

Author: cool

remains slightly unclear how the average team would leverage WASM and what real
world use cases are. Yet we're excited to explore this space more and support
the teams we work with experimenting what potential WASM can have for them.

## Rust is a competitive advantage

As mentioned above, Rust gives teams access to a level of efficiency,
performance, and robustness that's far beyond that of most other technologies
commonly used for web apps. Web apps written in Rust will have better response
times while requiring fewer resources which saves money and energy (Shane Miller
and Carl Lerche gave a

> [talk about how using Rust helps minimizing the environmental impact](<(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yQZaBtUjQ1w)>)

Reviewer 2: In the preview deployment, the link is this one: https://deploy-preview-1894--objective-northcutt-37494c.netlify.app/blog/2022/10/12/making-a-bet-on-rust/(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yQZaBtUjQ1w)

I'm unsure if this is an issue with the preview deployment or if this will be wrong in production.

Author: fixed, there was sth. wrong in the Markdown.

of the systems we all build every day at AWS re:Invent 2021).

At the same time, teams working with Rust can have more confidence in their code
because of Rust's rich type system and modern language concepts that eliminate
entire classes of errors. That does not only make code more stable at runtime
and less likely to run into unforeseen errors in production, but also makes it
easier to make changes to systems and maintain them over time compared to

> dynamically typed languages (going back to strongly typed languages is a general
> trend in the industry of course, most prominently demonstrated by the huge
> success that TypeScript had over the past few years).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dynamically typed languages (going back to strongly typed languages appears to be a general
trend in the industry, most prominently demonstrated by the huge
success that TypeScript had over the past few years).
```

> Finally, building system in Rust is a competitive advantage in an industry that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, building systems in Rust is a competitive advantage in an industry that
```

has been
[voted the most loved language](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022/#section-most-loved-dreaded-and-wanted-programming-scripting-and-markup-languages)
seven years in a row and literally every engineer in the world™ is eager to work
with it. Companies that can hire for Rust (and are willing to up-level people
that are new to the language), will have no problems finding people for years to
come.

## Mainmatter ❤️ Rust

We believe betting on Rust will benefit the teams we work with and enable a
bright future for our company at the same time. We're looking forward to
<strong>helping teams adopt Rust for their web projects through
[team augmentation and training](/services/team-augmentation-and-training/)</strong>
which we have both been doing successfully for many years. By doing that work,
we're looking forward to explore and pave the way for more widespread adoption
of Rust in web projects, thus moving both our clients as well as the general
Rust ecosystem forwards.

We've invested in Rust quite significantly already by

- joining the Rust Foundation as a
  [Silver member](https://foundation.rust-lang.org/members/)

> - having several people on the team maintain [crates.io](https://crates.io) on
>   company time for several years now

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- having several people on the team help maintain [crates.io](https://crates.io) on
  company time for several years now
```

we're not doing it all alone 😉

Author: sure 👍

- running Rust workshops to help teams get started with the language
- creating [EuroRust](https://eurorust.eu), the conference for the European Rust
  community (EuroRust 2022 is happening on October 13th and 14th)

We're looking forward to continue these investments, extending our involvement
with Rust even more over the next years and helping teams find their path

> towards Rust. If you're <strong>interested in Rust and want to adopt it in your
> organization</strong>, [reach out](/contact/)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
towards Rust. If you're **interested in Rust and want to adopt it in your
organization**, [reach out](/contact/)!
```

does Markdown not work here? 😅

---
title: "Making a strategic bet on Rust"
authorHandle: marcoow
tags: rust
bio: "Marco Otte-Witte"
description:
  "Mainmatter is making a strategic bet on Rust to become the leading
  consultancy to help teams adopt Rust for web projects."
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2022-10-12-making-a-bet-on-rust/og-image.jpg
tagline: |

>   <p>Rust continues on its path of success across the industry at full pace. It's been adopted by most big tech companies including Google, Microsoft, and AWS, has been <a href="https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022/#section-most-loved-dreaded-and-wanted-programming-scripting-and-markup-languages">voted the most loved language</a> seven years in a row and just recently <a href="https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8aebac82933ff1a7c8eede18cab11e1115e2062b">was added to the Linux Kernel</a>.</p>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  <p>Rust continues on its path of success across the industry at full pace. It's been adopted by most big tech companies including Google, Microsoft, and AWS, <a href="https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022/#section-most-loved-dreaded-and-wanted-programming-scripting-and-markup-languages">voted the most loved language</a> seven years in a row, and just recently <a href="https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8aebac82933ff1a7c8eede18cab11e1115e2062b">was added to the Linux Kernel</a>.</p>
```

  <p>We feel now is the right time for more teams to adopt Rust also in web projects.
  The ecosystem has reached sufficient maturity for that to be feasible and <strong>we're making
  a strategic decision to establish Mainmatter as the leading consultancy for Rust

>   in web contexts</strong>. We will leverage our years long experience augmenting and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  in web contexts</strong>. We will leverage our years-long experience augmenting and
```

  mentoring web teams to help them adopt Rust. Here's why we think this is the
  right step at the right time.</p>

# image: "/assets/images/posts/2022-10-12-making-a-bet-on-rust/mainmatter-loves-rust.svg"
# imageAlt: "Mainmatter loves Rust"
---

Rust makes a level of efficiency and performance that's on par with C and C++
accessible to a wider audience of engineering teams. While C and C++ have
allowed building highly efficient systems for decades, they come with so many
footguns that only extremely skilled and experienced teams can dare to build
anything substantial with them – and
[even those end up with systems that have plenty of problems](https://www.memorysafety.org/about/).

> Now with Rust everyone can build systems with the same level of efficiency and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, with Rust, everyone can build systems with the same level of efficiency and
```

> performance without having to worry about any of these footguns. Building on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
performance without having to worry about any of said footguns. Building on
```

Rust, their systems will not only be just as fast as an equivalent system
written in C but also more stable and robust. In addition to ensuring memory
safety, Rust's rich type system and concepts like the `Option` and `Result`
types further increase confidence by encouraging solid error handling through
concepts of the language itself.

Yet, Rust enables all that without sacrificing expressiveness of the language,
productivity, and developer experience – it's essentially on par in that regard
with other modern languages. Modern concepts like pattern matching and generics,
the integrated [package manager](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/) and its solid

> development tools make working with it a breeze.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
development tools, make working with it a breeze.
```

## Rust on the Web

So where do we see Rust fitting in for web projects? After ca. 10 years since
the language's creation, the ecosystem is still relatively young, yet mature
enough for a variety of use cases already:

- NIFs (Natively Implemented Functions) can be used to speed up parts of

>   existing systems written in Ruby, Elixir, Node, and many other languages, be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  existing systems written in Ruby, Elixir, Node, and many other languages, while working as
```

Author: it should be "by"

>   existing systems written in Ruby, Elixir, Node, and many other languages, be

Author: ```suggestion
  existing systems written in Ruby, Elixir, Node, and many other languages, by
```

  orders of magnitude and provide an easy onramp to introducing Rust into a
  team's tech stack.
- Isolated subsystems of larger server systems with very specific requirements
  in terms of performance and robustness are great candidates to build in Rust –
  whether those are individual services in a microservices architecture or
  layers in multi-layered systems.
- Similar to subsystems, downstream systems for e.g. data processing and similar
  tasks with relatively limited scope but hard requirements regarding efficiency
  will often benefit hugely from an implementation in Rust.

While all these are relatively isolated use cases with limited scope, we believe
that eventually Rust will be a reasonable choice for building complete API
servers as well. That problem space still requires some exploration to develop
and establish best practices and architectures and we're excited to bring in our

> years long experience building web apps of all kinds to help do this for the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
years-long experience building web apps of all kinds to help do this for the
```

benefit of our clients and the ecosystem overall. Establishing these patterns
and building consensus across the community will eventually drive adoption of

> Rust on the web even further as it makes Rust more accessible for even more

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rust on the web even further as it makes Rust more accessible for more
```

teams.

Of course there's also WASM – while that sees adoption outside of the browser
(e.g. via the
[WebAssembly Micro Runtime](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasm-micro-runtime)),
it was originally built to enable an entirely new category of apps to run in
browsers. Except for some high visibility examples
([Figma](https://www.figma.com/) likely being the most well known one), it

> remains slightly unclear how the average team would leverage WASM and what real

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
remains slightly unclear how the average team would work with WASM and what real
```

Author: I think this would change the meaning

world use cases are. Yet we're excited to explore this space more and support
the teams we work with experimenting what potential WASM can have for them.

## Rust is a competitive advantage

As mentioned above, Rust gives teams access to a level of efficiency,
performance, and robustness that's far beyond that of most other technologies
commonly used for web apps. Web apps written in Rust will have better response

> times while at the same time requiring fewer resources which saves money and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
times while requiring fewer resources which saves money and
```
